WIP: rephrase OpenID federation validation as a new challenge type. (#3)
peppelinux/draft-demarco-acme-openid-federation: draft-demarco-acme-openid-federation.md

}
~~~~

TODO: update text above here

## OpenID Federation challenge type

The OpenID Federation challenge type allows a client to prove control of a

> domain via mutual trust in an OIDC Federation. The client demonstrates control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
domain and its underlying endpoints using the trust evaluation mechanism provided by OpenID Federation 1.0. The client demonstrates control
```
I would not say mutual because the client has discovered in a previous moment all the ACME certificate issuers within a large scale federation, and at the time of the acme request only the acme issuers needs to evaluate the trust with the client

> of a key published in its OIDC Entity Configuration, which the ACME server uses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a cryptographic public key published in its OpenID Federation Entity Configuration, which the ACME server uses
```

> to validate that the client is in control of the domain.

Reviewer: requirement:

the domain must be part of the client_id and therefore of the http url used in the value of the parameter `sub` contained in the entity configuration

Author: I pulled in the following requirement around validation, attempting to match the existing check on the identifier the client is requesting issuance for:

> Verifies that the requested domain names match the FQDN contained within the `iss` parameter of the client's Entity Configuration.

The [OpenID Federation 1.0's Entity Statement](https://openid.net/specs/openid-federation-1_0.html#name-entity-statement) section says:

> iss
> REQUIRED. The Entity Identifier of the issuer of the Entity Statement. If the iss and the sub are identical, the issuer is making an Entity Statement about itself called an Entity Configuration.

Since we are explicitly checking the client's Entity Configuration, technically speaking, I think `iss` & `sub` are identical here. (Please correct me if I am wrong here.) Conceptually, however, I think `sub` makes more sense than `iss` since we are interested in knowing the subject of the configuration; I have made the suggested change to the requirements.

Reviewer: yes, in a entity configuration iss and sub are identical (while in a subordinate statements not).

The openid-federation-01 ACME challenge object has the following format:

type (required, string):  The string "openid-federation-01"

token (required, string):  A random value that uniquely identifies the
    challenge. This value MUST have at least 128 bits of entropy. It MUST NOT
    contain any characters outside the base64url alphabet as described in
    Section 5 of [RFC4648]. Trailing '=' padding characters MUST be stripped.
    See [RFC4086] for additional information on randomness requirements.

```
   {
     "type": "openid-federation-01",
     "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/prV_B7yEyA4",
     "status": "pending",
     "token": "LoqXcYV8q5ONbJQxbmR7SCTNo3tiAXDfowyjxAjEuX0"
   }
```

> The client responds with an object with the following format:

Author: Which request? The client's response has a non-normative example below; the rest of the process is standard ACME as described in RFC 8555.

> The client responds with an object with the following format:

Reviewer: a response happes after a request, there is space to further describe the flow if you agree in giving more guidance to the reader

> The client responds with an object with the following format:

Author: I added a non-normative example of what the challenge object would like like post-validation.

sig (required, string):  a base64url encoding of a JWS, signing the token

>     encoded in UTF-8 with one of the keys published in the client's OIDC Entity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    encoded in UTF-8 with one of the keys published in the client's OpenID Federation Entity
```

    Configuration.

> trust_chain (optional, array of string):  an array of base64url-encoded JWS,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trust_chain (optional, array of string):  an array of base64url-encoded bytes containing a signed JWT,
```

    representing the trust chain of the client in the OpenID Federation. See
    section 4.3 of [OIDC-FED]. It is RECOMMENDED that the client include this

>     field; otherwise, the ACME server SHOULD start Federation Entity Discovery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    field; otherwise, the ACME server MUST start a Federation Entity Discovery about the client
```

how the acme issuer know which is the client's entity id? suggest to add it in the previous object to provide a way to the acme issuer to fetch the entity configuration, when the trust chain is not provided within the request

Reviewer: another requirement is that the client, within its trust chain, SHOULD use the same trust anchor that it has in common with the acme issuer, in other words the trust anchor used to evaluate the trust with the acme issuer

Author: > how the acme issuer know which is the client's entity id? suggest to add it in the previous object to provide a way to the acme issuer to fetch the entity configuration, when the trust chain is not provided within the request

I added text to this effect.

For my own education: is there a reason we couldn't start federation entity discovery based on the FQDN contained in the identifier? For example, could multiple Entities have Entity Configurations with the same FQDN in `iss`? Or maybe it is impractical to look up entities based on partial Entity IDs, even if the FQDN is unique?

> another requirement is that the client, within its trust chain, SHOULD use the same trust anchor that it has in common with the acme issuer, in other words the trust anchor used to evaluate the trust with the acme issuer

Added text to this effect. Why is this a `SHOULD` rather than a `MUST` -- what behavior would we expect of the server if the client sends a trust chain to an anchor it does not trust? (Failure would be the most likely response, but I think we could also allow the server to perform Entity Discovery if it receives a trust chain that it can't verify.)

Reviewer: we use entity id using https url, therefore more than a single FQDN, since within the same hostname/domain we might have more entities with different, even if derived from the same FQDN, entities (eg: multitenancy)

there might be implementations/deployments that wants to use federation in a more "decentralized" way (such as openid gain-poc wg) where RP of federation X trusts also a list of third party trust anchors belonging to other federations. I nthis scenario X trusts Y because X trusts Y-TrustAnchor and Y trusts X because X-TrustAnchor. These kind of decision belongs to the trust framework in use and goes beyond the scope of openid federation, therefore I decided to use a SHOULD there

Author: From off-PR discussion: I think we should define, probably in another PR, what fields are filled out in the X.509 certificates. RFC 8555 ACME is concerned with validating a domain, and will generate a certificate for that domain. But in a multitenant situation, both tenants of a given domain would get a certificate associating the relevant key to the domain, which I think is not desirable.

I'm unaware of what will be consuming these certificates, and especially in what they will expect. Is this something we are free to define, or are there designs/implementations that are already consuming the X.509 certificates this design would be creating?

We should also specify the public key that is included in the certificate -- IIRC from our discussion, this is the same public key that is included in the Entity Configuration.

    to obtain the trust chain related to the client.

```
   POST /acme/chall/prV_B7yEyA4

>    Host: example.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Host: client.example.com
```

Author: This request is to the issuer, i.e. the ACME server, rather than the client.

Reviewer: therefore I'd go to server.example.com

our example would give more guidance to facilitate the readers in having a good read experience

Author: I updated all of the domain names to be `issuer.example.com` (matching some pre-existing URIs for the issuer) or `client.example.com`.

   Content-Type: application/jose+json

   {
     "protected": base64url({
       "alg": "ES256",

>        "kid": "https://example.com/acme/acct/evOfKhNU60wg",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       "kid": "1",
```

Author: I think this is right, currently -- this would be an ACME account key, rather than a key published in the client's Entity Configuration. (I think it's valuable to maintain the concept of ACME accounts separately from the OpenID Entity Configurations since (a) ACME implementations will generally expect accounts to exist and (b) the ACME implementation may wish to implement account controls/rate-limiting/etc at the level of ACME accounts rather than OpenID Entities, i.e. individual domains.)

However, we could add a `kid` field to the payload of the challenge, indicating which key in the Entity Configuration to use to validate the signature. What do you think?

Reviewer: I would not embed challenges values in kid, it's up to the implementers and jwk issuers decide the kid parameter value

Author: Hmm -- there are two types of keys in play here:

1. ACME account keys. This is identified by the `kid` field referenced in this comment. I think this should stay the same.

2. OpenID entity keys. We should decide where to place this `kid` field. I think we could either have the server check all keys published in the entity configuration, or have the client include a `kid` field in the key response identifying which OpenID entity key is used to meet the challenge.

       "nonce": "UQI1PoRi5OuXzxuX7V7wL0",
       "url": "https://example.com/acme/chall/prV_B7yEyA4"
     }),
     "payload": base64url({
      "sig": "wQAvHlPV1tVxRW0vZUa4BQ...",
      "trust_chain": ["eyJhbGciOiJFU...", "eyJhbGci..."]
     }),
     "signature": "Q1bURgJoEslbD1c5...3pYdSMLio57mQNN4"
   }
```

On receiving a response, the server retrieves the public keys associated with
the given entity (possibly performing Federation Entity Discovery to do so),
then:

* Verifies that the requested domain names match the FQDN contained within the
  `iss` parameter of the client's Entity Configuration. For example, if the
  `iss` parameter within the Entity Configuration contains the value
  `https://requestor.example.org/oidc/rp`, the extracted FQDN is then

>   `requestor.example.org`. (Note: since the Entity Configuration can contain at

Reviewer: I would move this note out of the brackets and configuring it as a normative requirement

the client can only request certificate about the FQDN used in its federation entity id

  most one FQDN, this effectively means that this challenge type works with
  requests for a single domain name only.)

* Verifies that the sig field of the payload includes a valid JWS, signed with
  one of the keys published in the client's Entity Configuration.

If all of the above verifications succeed, then the validation is successful.

> Otherwise, it has failed.

Reviewer: provide failure behaviour such as giving http response error code in the form of non-normative example and according to the ACME specs legacy

Author: IMO, we should follow the ACME spec as well as RFC 8737, RFC 8823 -- these all define challenge types in terms of success or failure, relying on [RFC 8555 section 7.3.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8555/#section-7.5.1) to generically define how success/failure of an authorization attempt is handled.

I added some text referring to this section.
